We're talking about
the exFAT file system
here in Course 10,
and in this module, module 5,
we're going to talk about
exFAT file recovery.
To recover files in exFAT,
we would be looking for
those directories that
were marked as not
in use because if we can
find those unallocated
directories,
we can get all the information we
need to recover the files.
So we would search for
directory entries with
the directory entry
flags set at not in use.
We would also search not
only in the root directory,
but also in some
unallocated clusters,
you would search
unallocated space disk wide
to find those directory entries.
Remember, if the parent
folder is deleted,
the child entries are
going to remain unchanged.
We would locate the directory
entry set and we would use
the information contained in
the directory entry set to
recover the file
using file carving.
We'd have the file name,
the file size and the
starting cluster.
You could also file curve,
which we're going
to cover later in
this path for the file header.
If you knew the type of file
that you were looking for,
like a JPEG or a
document or a PDF.
We'll talk about that when
we cover some file headers
and carving later
on in this path.
We're going to do a little
bit of a walk-through,
and I'm going to show you
how you would go about
carving a file using
the directory entry.
The items we're going to need,
we are going to need
active disk editor
and our exFAT VHD.
We're going to search for
unallocated directory entries and
then we're going to
use that information.
I'm going to show you how
we would carve the file.
So let's get started
on our walk-through.
Let's get started
with our walk-through
of the exFAT file recovery.
The first thing we
need to do is mount
our exFAT virtual hard drive.
We're going to go
into disk management.
We're going to go to
''Actions'', attach VHD.
We're going to browse to where
VHD is saved on our computer.
We're going to ''Select''
it and remember
it's named exFAT VHD.
We're going to go
ahead and open it
up, and click ''Okay''.
Once you click ''Okay'',
the drive will mount.
Once you've mounted your VHD,
go ahead and minimize
disk management,
but before you do that,
make note of the drive number,
the physical disk number,
and the volume letter,
the drive letter.
Mine is F, yours will
probably be different
on your computer.
Let me go ahead and
minimize disk management.
Please open up
active disk editor.
When active disk editor opens up,
we're going to select Open Disk,
and from the top menu bar here
we're going to select volumes
because we want to look
at the logical volume,
the exFAT volume.
We're going to select
our exFAT volume from
the drive letter we noted in
disk management and then
we're going to click "Open".
As you can see, by default,
it opens to the
volume boot record,
which is logical sector
zero of the volume.
Now we're going to
go ahead and in
the toolbar right under
the Edit and right
next to the Unicode,
we're going to open
browse file records.
We can see we have all of our
file records here and we're
looking for the root.
But before we go there,
we do need some information
from this volume boot record.
What I need to find
is I need to know
how many sectors per cluster.
Remember, that
information is over here.
So you're going to be looking
at offset hexadecimal 6D.
We're going to go down
six lines from the start,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6 lines down and over to D,
and this is where our
sectors per cluster is.
We see our sectors
per cluster is 0, 3.
If we remember back
that was that shift.
That's bytes per sectors
per cluster shift.
We had to take the 3 and we
took the power of 2 times N,
and N would be the number that we
have in our sectors
per cluster shift.
Our number is 3, so it would
be 2 to the power of 3.
Then we don't need to
use our calculator,
which we don't really
have to use a calculator
for 2 to the power of 3,
it comes out to 8.
That's 2 times 2 is 4
times 2 is 8, so that's 8.
We have 8 sectors per
cluster and our bytes
per sector was nine.
That would be 2 to the power of
9 and we figured that out,
and it was 512.
We used our calculator
for that, it was 512,
so 512 bytes per sector,
8 sectors per cluster.
We need to remember
that information.
You can write it down
if you'd like to.
Now, let's go into
our root directory.
From up top where we
see our Files listed,
we're going to select
the root folder,
the root directory and
this is the directory.
Now in the beginning of the
root directory member we
see our volume labels
the first entry,
and that's true on
all FAT file systems.
Then we start to see
our directory entry
sets after our system
files or looking for
a directory entry
set that starts with
hexadecimal 05.
Now I can go ahead and
look at these manually,
which on a large drive is
going to be quite tedious.
Most of your forensic tools
will be able to
find these for you.
Another way we could find
them which still will give
us a lot of information,
but we could use our search
feature and we could simply
search for hexadecimal 05.
We could do that.
We could say find all,
and we'll give it a minute to run
through and once it runs through,
we're going to have a lot of
hits and we'll go through them,
but it's going to find
every hexadecimal 05 on
our drive and you can
see we have 193 hits.
Let's scroll through those and we
want to find the file
we were working with
before which was newdoc1.txt,
so we'll scroll through
until we get to
it and once we get to it,
we can see our hit right here.
If we click on the
root directory,
it does highlight in
yellow all the 05 entries,
which is a little more
helpful to us but we see
our entry right here and we
did pass this entry earlier.
But we're going to go ahead
and take a look at it
again and the main
one I'm interested in
is going to be the
one that starts with
hexadecimal 04 because this
is the directory entry.
If you remember, the
directory entry contains
all the dates and times
in that UTC offset.
I want to find the
starting cluster in
the file size to carve the
file and the file name.
I'm going to go down
to my stream-entry,
which is going to be
hexadecimal 40 and from
here I want to find
my starting cluster.
If you remember, to find
our starting cluster,
we would go down one
line and over four.
It's a 4-byte value and
in our hex interpreter,
if we look to the right,
we can see that the
value is hexadecimal 18,
so cluster 18 is going to be
the starter of this file.
Now I need to look
at the file size,
so I'm going to take a look
at my next four bytes,
and the file size is 63 bits.
I highlight these 4 bytes
and look to our hex interpreter.
That is a 32-bit unsigned value,
and it is 63.
My starting cluster, let's
just check it one more time.
These four bytes right here
tell us a starting cluster
from 1, 4 to 1,
7 will tell us the starting
cluster and it is cluster 18
and then my file size
is the next four bytes
and remember this is red
little-endian and the
file size is 63 bytes.
Because it's four bytes and
each byte is eight bits long,
it's a 32-bit value,
and it is an unsigned integer,
so it is not a negative number.
Now what I'm going to do
is I'm going to navigate
up to cluster 18.
So go to "Navigation",
go to "Sector" and come
down here in the "Cluster",
not "Sector", we're
going to type in
18 in that box and we're
going to say "Okay."
Now, this takes me out
to where my file is.
I'm going to go ahead
and right-click
and I'm going to tag this
as "Beginning of Block."
Now, in the FAT file system,
we allocate space in clusters,
so I know I need to go
one full cluster or
eight sectors down to
find the end of the allocated
space for this file.
All this stuff is
file slack starting
from the hexadecimal 65 where
I've highlighted right now,
all this is file slack,
all these zeros are file slack,
so that's going to be the
beginning of my block.
Now I'm going to go down
eight sectors and I've reached
the end of my file right here,
and I'm going to mark
this as "End a Block."
Now I have the entire space
that was allocated to
that file highlighted and I could
carve this out into a new file.
To recover a file,
we need to know the file size and
the starting cluster or
the starting sector depending
on how you're navigating.
That's one way we could do it.
Another way I said is
we could search by
file headers if we were looking
for a certain type of file,
and we will cover
this later on in
the path and file carving.
But this is how we would
carve out our file.
You would not change the data on
the drive but you
could go and reach in
the bitmap and you
could go and change
all the first hex character of
the directory entries
back to in use and you
could go into the FAT Bitmap
and re-change that
if you wanted to.
But normally you would
do it the way I just
showed you if you were
able to find in unallocated
directory entry.
If you can't find a
directory entry that is
still intact but no
longer marked as in use,
you would have to file carve by
file header and that's how
you would recover the file.
That is file recovery in
the exFAT file system.
In our next course,
we're going to talk
about creating
a disk image and how we
go about doing that.